it was the summer of 1949 young
geologist vadim kolpakov was on a
mission to northern Russia in the
Irkutsk region his job was to draw a
geological map of the area while on duty
he came across something so mysterious
and remarkable it continued to puzzle
experts decades later ooh what could it
be it was the middle of August
go pack off though tired from all the
walking reached the area he needed a map
there he meant the local Yakutia who
warned him about a bad place hidden in
the woods though now it's more famous as
the pototsky crater locals had dubbed it
fire Eagle Nest probably because it
looks like a giant bird nest sitting on
a hill and I'm a giant it rises 130 feet
in the air half as tall as a giant
sequoia the cone like structures base as
a diameter of 320 feet almost as wide as
the Seattle Space Needle is tall but
what was hiding inside would be the most
surprising and baffling discovery well
if you could get close enough to uncover
its secrets according to the yaku people
even wild animals are scared to go near
it
locals had all sorts of theories about
this earthly mystery they said that
people fell ill around it and some of
them even went missing never to be found
when the young geologist heard about the
possible dangers he wasn't scared at all
he became even more curious about what's
going on in that crater so he decided to
approach it get a closer look and find
out he thought that as an expert he
might be able to give a simple
explanation if only it were that easy he
began walking towards it slowly while
also observing the nature around it he
looked at some of the half broken trees
the soil and the plants at first he
thought it might be an archaeological
artifact but the ancient locals didn't
have the engineering technology the
Egyptians or Romans had back then to
build something so big could it be the
work of another ancient civilization
though
from far away it looked like a giant
bird nest indeed the closer he got the
bigger it became that was when he
realized it couldn't have been built by
humans there was nothing that resembled
any ancient architecture he could
connect it to maybe it was a volcano a
plausible theory but there haven't been
any around that location for millions of
years plus the creature appeared to be
fresh
it was also deserted trees didn't grow
on the slopes of this natural structure
and the winds didn't carry enough soil
to make plant growth possible are the
aquit people correct do animals avoid it
too he climbed all the way to the top
and discovered something unbelievable it
was so hot that he felt the sweat
running down his forehead It was as if
he was close to a fire source when he
looked down he was met with a perfectly
circular mound in the middle another
mystery he thought to himself the round
hump in the center of the crater was
around 40 feet tall the height of your
standard telephone pole such things
don't appear in volcanoes even in
extinct ones and there aren't any around
here that link to this particular mount
without being able to solve the strange
appearance of the bad place coal
pack-off went back home and told
everyone about his discovery what was
once a local anomaly would soon become a
worldwide mystery after a while the
crater was named the most mysterious
place in Russia for many reasons trees
didn't grow on or around the structure
and they also found that radiation
levels were very high but I'm getting
ahead of myself
and I sure don't want to do that his
discovery sparked an interest in the
scientific community and people started
digging and coming up with theories a
lot of experts agreed that this must
have been the work of a meteorite they
believed that the space rock entered the
Earth's atmosphere at incredible speeds
but had been slowed down quite a bit by
the time it struck the surface but it
still hit hard enough to form the
infamous crater
as the years went on without a definite
answer to what happened almost everyone
agreed that this must be the case but
later other scientists came to add their
own alternate theories one of them was
geologist Alexander port Knopf he
believed that the Creator was the result
of a space rock slicing off the famous
Tunguska meteoroid which exploded over
Krasnoyarsk the third-largest city in
Siberia in the summer of 1908 but get
this the meteorite that should have
struck the earth was never found
the accepted theory is that it
disintegrated a few miles in the air
before it made contact those two
theories inspired many expeditions to
the mysterious site visiting scientists
took samples of the soil and surrounding
plants wood lab tests proved that this
thing had cosmic origins hard to say
because their efforts ended up being
fruitless so the research continued and
only grew as the story began making
headlines in 2006 dr. alexander
dmitriyevich Cook's State Technical
University found a puzzling magnetic
anomaly in the area he thought that
there could be iron or some other metal
a few hundred feet below the surface so
another expert joined the project it was
dr. Igor Simon off from the Moscow
Institute for problems and mechanics he
ran some tests to see if a meteorite
impact could create this double mound
structure sometime later he came out
with his findings the crater was likely
formed by a falling somewhat spherical
object made from a dense material that
could only exist in space when the paper
covering this theory came out some
experts did more experiments to see if
it was possible they found that it
wasn't just one object falling from
space but to traveling over 14,000 miles
per hour when the first meteorite hit
the earth it exploded and formed the
crater
then the second object followed but it
was slowed down by the first impact and
sunk deep into the ground
yet again there were problems with that
theory too many astrophysicists objected
claiming that meteorites can't fly one
after the other and hit the planet in
the exact same spot with so many
questions still unanswered more and more
experts came to the Siberian location to
take a shot at solving the mystery one
of them started collecting wood samples
to determine the age of the trees in the
area and compared them to small samples
taken on the slope itself in the end
they finally had a breakthrough they
found that the crater likely appeared
about 300 years ago when check how still
a mystery they came across another
secret while studying the trees by
counting the rings in a tree's trunk
scientists can find not only how old
they are but also any abnormalities in
that time with this experiment they
noticed that the vegetation grew way
faster than usual in this spot after
ruling out other growth boosting factors
like better soil content and more
sunshine for some period of time the
only guests they were left with was
radiation yes the experts knew that when
exposed to high doses of radiation trees
and plants grow faster but the radiation
levels on and around the crater were low
at some point in the last 300 years or
so there must have been radioactive
material in the area their way to check
was to examine the trees even further
for elements that show that and bingo
they found high levels of uranium and
strontium in the trunks but those
elements had decayed in the last 20
years hence why initial readings on the
crater itself weren't too high the next
step was to finally unveil the mystery
of what this thing is they turned their
attention to the assumption kolpakov had
made when he first explored the fire
eagle nest what if this thing is a
volcano that instead of lava spews out
gas and do you think that was the answer
they had been looking for you should
know by now that there was a problem
with this theory - the gases most
volcanoes put out aren't dangerously
radioactive so that couldn't explain the
radiation in the trees that and it
hadn't erupted in recent years to
analyze its gas though a gas eruption
could explain how the thing rose from
the underground and a second eruption
could be what caused that mound to
spring up in the center yet the mystery
remains to this day why were the trees
radioactive at some point why is there
high magnetism in the area if a space
rock hit the earth where did it go and
if it wasn't a meteorite then what gave
birth to this enigmatic mound jutting
out of the isolated Siberian forests
expeditions continue to this day
in search of answers